Finance Tracker - Python Project Documentation

Overview

Finance Tracker is a terminal-based budget and expense management application written in Python. This beginner-level project is designed to help users track their income, categorize expenses, set monthly budgets, and perform basic analysis on spending habits. The entire application runs through command-line interactions without the use of functions, making it ideal for new Python learners.

Features

1. User Personalization

Greets the user by name upon launching the program.

2. Current Status

Prompts user to enter monthly salary.

Calculates and displays:

Total monthly salary

Total expenses made so far

Remaining balance

3. Transactions

Add new expense:

Input description, amount, optional note

Select existing category or create a new one

Automatically tags the expense with today’s date

View all transactions in a list format

View today’s expenses only

4. Budgeting

Set total monthly budget

Update monthly budget anytime

Set per-category spending limits

Warns if category budget is exceeded

5. Analysis

Displays the following analytics based on entered expenses:

Total expenses

Average expense value

Highest and lowest individual expenses

Category-wise total expense breakdown

6. Filter / Search / Delete

Filter expenses by category

Search expenses using keywords from description or notes

Delete specific transactions with confirmation

7. Reset Month

Clears all stored data for a new month including:

Expenses

Salary

Monthly budget

Category limits

8. Exit and Save

On exiting, the program creates a finance_summary.txt file containing:

User name

Total expenses

List of all transactions with dates, categories, and notes

Technologies Used

Language:

Python 3.7+

Python Modules:

datetime – To record the current date

Built-in functions: sum(), max(), min(), enumerate(), input(), print()

Data Structures:

Lists: For storing expenses and categories

Dictionaries: For storing individual expense details and category-wise limits

Data Storage (In-Memory)

salary: Stores user's monthly income

expenses: List of dictionaries, where each dictionary holds:

description: what the money was spent on

amount: amount of money spent

category: the category of the expense

date: the date when the expense was made

note: optional user note

monthly_budget: Overall monthly spending limit

categories: Default and user-defined spending categories

category_limits: Dictionary storing per-category budget caps

User Flow Summary

Launch the program and enter name

Choose from 7 main options:

View current status

Manage transactions

Set/update budgets

Analyze spending

Search, filter, or delete expenses

Reset monthly data

Exit and save

On exit, a text report is generated summarizing the financial activity

How to Run the Program

Ensure Python 3.7+ is installed

Save the code to a file named finance_tracker.py

Run the script in terminal:

python finance_tracker.py

Example Files in Project

File Name

Purpose

finance_tracker.py

Main Python script

finance_summary.txt

Auto-generated report on program exit

README.md

Project documentation

Prevents uploading unnecessary files

Future Improvements

Modularize the code using functions and classes

Add persistent storage using JSON or CSV files

Implement a graphical user interface (GUI) with Tkinter

Visualize category spending using bar or pie charts

Add user login/signup for personalized profiles

